Behind now, are we?
Yeah. We are. Sorry.
Sorry.
Hello.
Transparency
International.
They're in by Zoom.
Hi there.
Oh, hello. How are you?
Yeah, sorry about that. I just-
No, that's cool
... tried to sort this out.
We've got
10 minutes with you.
The committee, just for people beaming in for this,
please leave some time for questions, otherwise I'll just have to cut you off, and
that's not very helpful. The committee does like to ask questions.
We've all read your submissions, so we don't have to keep going through
belaboring them because we've read them. Okay. The time is yours. Thanks.
Sure. I think I'm taking that the submission is read.
I just think there's three main issues, and that was one is the integrity of
electoral processes generally. The second is oversight
and accountability and reporting, especially on things like special votes.
We don't think there's anybody who's got an eye on that, and I'm afraid it
doesn't seem to be the Select Committee either.
The third one is education and information for new candidates,
and then there's misinformation as well and disinformation.
But those other ones are the main ones.
So what we think is, and I think other
people have spoken on it, is that the kind of rigor that's
enabled by the Electoral Commission running the central election is
not
then enabled in the local government elections, and that's putting
stress on everywhere.
We've recommended a move away from postal voting, because that's clearly
not working, and
appreciate there's a lot of complexity in there.
But also, we're really concerned about recent events in the last
election.
Realize that none have got to the police prosecution yet, but they were certainly
significant enough to void an election result.
And that was of serious concern, probably the largest.
Whatever it was, somebody took those votes out of people's letterboxes.
Somebody faked the
votes, and that's a hugely serious issue that needs to be dealt with more than
just by the police. So I would've thought an inquiry would've been the best
approach to that. Anyway, I think that's all I'm saying.
We've got sort of what we've said, and so I'm happy to answer questions.
All right. Thank you very much. I've got first question from Mr. Carl Bates.
Thanks very much, Chair. Thanks very much for your submission.
Found it really an interesting read.
Was interested in your point made under
2B1
about conduct of elections and
processes prior to election day for raising issues, and just interested
if you had any thoughts about how that could occur.
Yes. I've been trying to nut that through as well.
How would you actually manage it? I suppose you could have the initiation of
an inquiry at the point at which it's raised.
It's possible that I don't think there was any ability
for the electoral officer to have initial
inquiries, to have an inquiry and query.
It certainly is a problem, and it's not for me to work out because I think it needs
a good legal brain to work out what's fair and due process around
that.
I think that's true.
After all, you are in the middle of an election.
You don't want to attract people attacking others just for the sake of putting an
election off.
Yeah.
You don't want to besmirch the name of any.
But on the other hand, it was such a serious issue and it could only be dealt with
afterwards, and I think there has to be a mechanism.
If there was an Electoral Commission role, that would be the place for it to be
considered. So it would be lodged with the Electoral Commission during the election
process.
Okay.
Ms. Celia Boyd. Celia Wade-Brown, sorry.
Thank you.
Kia ora, thank you very much for your submission and your concerns
about transparency and democracy.
You've mentioned the report of the local
government electoral working group,
and you would generally believe that having
local elections run by the Electoral
Commission would be more
transparent than
by two private companies that we can't use the
Official Informations Act on.
That's correct. There's a number of reasons why we think it would be better,
and that education element also goes to that.
And also transparency. And we tried very hard to find
what
people were being told at different sites.
Seems to be quite variable. There does not seem to be any consideration
in many of them, that they're not actually talking about what you cannot do and
what's ethically not able to be done or legally not able to be done.
Trying to pressure voters,
for example,
should be something that's 101 really in a candidate's
briefing.
That's the problem with a lot of new candidates being new on every local body
election. You've got the potential for many more people to
really not understand what the electoral process is about, and I think that was
seen in a couple of other examples there.
Yeah.
Thank you.
All right. Hey, got to thank you for your submission.
It was a fascinating submission, particularly going through all that analysis,
so really appreciate you bringing that to our
attention.
Good. I do think the problem with special votes is also it's still not
available on the Department of Internal Affairs website.
So that kind of lack of transparency about what's happening with special votes
in those local elections is a real problem, and it means that you're not able to do
your job properly either. So I think that's a significant issue
around the elections, and that's partly because you've got private providers doing
that work.
Okay. Thank you. Right.
Now we've got the Green Party
via Zoom.
Mr Summerville, are you with us?
He's on board?
Just coming in.
Just coming through. Okay.
Mr Summerville, if you're there, that'd be great.
Good morning, Mr Summerville.
Good morning.
Now we've got 10 minutes with you.
Right. Thank you very much. Tēnā koutou katoa. Ka mihi mahana kia koutou.
I'm Alan Summerville. I'm co-convener of the Greens local government caucus.
Our local government caucus represents 28 elected members
around the country who were endorsed by the Green Party in the
2025 elections.
I'm a regional councilor with the Otago Regional Council,
and I'm here in Ōtepoti, Dunedin.
I'll concentrate on a few parts of our written submission, the parts
where I have the closest personal knowledge and experience.
I guess our starting point is the belief that
it should be straightforward for people to vote, and that goes back into the
principles. I can refer to the principles of the Local Electoral Act
2001, where it says, "All qualified persons have a
reasonable and equal opportunity to cast an informed vote." And
it talks about public confidence and public understanding of
local electoral processes.
So, I think my first point is that the postal
voting system is well past its use-by date,
and it effectively excludes many people from casting a vote.
I'll relate some of my experience from Dunedin last year.
In July last year,
Green Party members did a round of door knocking in different parts of
Dunedin with the intent of asking people,
"Are you enrolled?" And getting them enrolled to vote.
One area we concentrated on was North Dunedin, an area with a
high transient population, with many tertiary students
there. What we found was mail composting in
letterboxes down the street-
Right
... including piles of orange Electoral Commission
envelopes. And naturally, of course, we directed people to the Vote NZ
website to get them enrolled.
We returned to the area in September
and found in North Dunedin, the majority of people had not received
their voting papers. That was either because they had moved
flats from last year and not updated their address in spite of our
best efforts,
or they were enrolled at their parent's address in another town, and so did
not receive their voting papers. So the postal
voting system, it's certainly not the whole explanation for
the low voter turnout, but I think it is part of it.
As a solution, I'd go with the LGNZ
proposals. I think you've heard from them this morning, and they've gone into that
in great detail. So please, let's retire the
postal voting system and have something better in place before
2028.
Another important point for us is to say let's use
STV for all elections and all councils.
Be consistent and use the more democratic STV approach.
Again, using Otago for an example, the Otago
Regional Council and the Dunedin City Council use STV.
The other councils in the region use first past the post.
So, it ended up with the situation that voters in Queenstown Lakes
District Council, Waitaki District Council, Central Otago, and
Clutha had two voting systems to contend with in the
same set of voting papers.
I see there's evidence presented to you in the submission by the
Greater Wellington Regional Council saying- ...
there's robust data across numerous triennial elections, clear
evidence of a higher level of informal votes where electors are asked to apply
different voting systems in multi-member elections.
So, let's not put those additional barriers for people.
Let's use the one system.
Also propose to
increase government resourcing to aid the participation of people with
disabilities. One specific suggestion from us is
to apply the Electoral Access Fund also to local
body elections.
So going back to the Local
Electoral Act 2001, all qualified persons have a reasonable and
equal opportunity to accept nomination as a candidate,
and that use of the Electoral Access Fund would assist with that.
You'll have seen that a part of our submission was on handling of
roll data. There are some specific recommendations in there.
That's not my area of expertise.
Mm.
But that's still useful stuff, and I'll be pleased to take any questions now.
Right. Well, rather unsurprisingly, we've got Celia Wade-Brown who wants
to ask you a question.
Kia ora, Alan.
Kia ora.
Thank you for presenting this. I'm interested in the area
of consistency between local and central
government election processes.
Yep.
And,
the postal versus in-person, and the
commission running the education makes sense.
Presumably, you would want to see some
alignment in the enrollment rules.
So at the moment, as I understand it, the local government you can
enroll up to the day before. Until recently, central
government you could enroll on the day, and now that's been
rolled back.
Should we settle on something that is common to both
systems?
I think that consistency is very helpful, and in that
example that you have given, our very strong
preference would be to be able to enroll right up until
election day. But yeah, there are a number of places
where that consistency can be brought in, and one way of achieving that
would be to have the Electoral Commission managing local body,
local council elections as well.
Thank you.
Can I ask you a question? You said in respect of overseas voters, they should get
their voting papers earlier.
Yeah.
How many people actually vote, if they're living in London or New
York or Singapore, in a local election in little old New
Zealand? I can imagine we have difficulty even for a national election.
Do you know what the numbers are?
Look, I'm afraid I do not know the answer to that, no.
Sorry about that.
I know, a specific question. Anyway, Pete,
I don't think I've got any other questions. Thank you for your time this morning.
It's a good submission.
Thanks for the opportunity to present. Kia ora.
Right. Now we're going to Jo Daly from the Christchurch City
Council by Zoom.
Are you there?
Oh, good morning.
Just, yeah, we're still going. Now, we've got 10 minutes with you.
We have read your submission, but the time is yours.
Tena koutou. I'm Jo Daly. I'm the
council's governance advisor, and I'm also our deputy electoral officer.
I do have an apology from our elected members who are currently sitting through
annual plan hearings, day two of many.
Oh.
You've obviously got the council's submission, and I'll just reiterate a few
key points from that, including those related to your terms of
reference. And I'll also just introduce a couple of points from some work
council staff have done post-election, in analyzing
the voter turnout and from some survey responses
to some election-related questions.
Council's consistently submitted in support of changes to
legislation to allow for the modernization of voting,
increasing civic education awareness nationally,
accessibility, including to those overseas, and improving
central government support and funding for local elections.
Like probably everyone you're hearing from, we are
concerned at the decline in voter participation and the
ability to attract good candidates,
and these matters are in line with the national trends.
The Justice Committee, in the time I've been working closely with
elections, has made many recommendations relating to these
matters, which disappointingly haven't been progressed.
In particular, the consistent theme from those recommendations is
regarding modernization and alternative voting methods,
review of postal challenges, including alternatives for
overseas, and the review of voting systems and methods.
So we're really keen to see some of those recommendations
and recommendations you yourselves may make actually
progressed,
rather than staying in a report.
Just regarding the voting process,
the key question you asked regarding disallowed special
voters. We had 82% of those that
returned special voting documents allowed, and the majority of
those disallowed were because they weren't able to be verified on the electoral
roll. So that could have rolled into the next point
regarding the electoral rolls. We didn't have any significant issues with
them.
But the majority
of electors who enrolled were on the
unpublished roll. Who enrolled, sorry, past the close the
final roll, didn't receive clear or full
information on what they needed to do to be able to vote.
So we see that that is really an opportunity for
change,
particularly those unpublished roll electors.
We've got over 3,000 in Christchurch, and only
26% of them
requested special voting
documents, because they receive correspondence from the
Electoral Commission, but there's not much detail in there apart
from contact the council if you want to make a vote.
There's an opportunity to put more information in there.
I'll be strongly supportive of that.
Just regarding the vote bins, we had
64 orange vote bins across Christchurch,
in all our council facilities, including our recreation centers.
We also had them at the airport, at the university library, and
in supermarkets. So, they worked really well,
and neighboring councils used similar and we were promoting
that voting documents could be returned across those boundaries
because we all use the same election service provider.
And we also had special voting and on-site voting available from
12 sites across the city. So that was Monday to
Friday, and we also had sites open specifically for
that on the weekend prior to election day and election day.
So there's quite a lot of effort made in making it as accessible as
possible.
We didn't have any significant issues raised regarding
integrity in Christchurch, or not that I or our electoral
officer were aware of. But reports from
candidates about online activity from other candidates and the public,
which I'm sure you're well aware of, those kind of concerns.
We did receive a number of queries regarding the requirements, entitlements,
or qualifications necessary for a person to
stand as an elected member, which was something
very-We have an external electoral
officer now, and that has worked well with our
staff. And with regard to the Electoral Commission, as you'll see from the
submission, strongly support
an increased role in them with good consultation on how that works.
Myself and our communications team work really closely with our local
Electoral Commission engagement team.
We attend events together. We make sure there's always
voting information on our sites and things like that, and I think
that's quite a great partnership and a really good example of what perhaps could
happen nationally. And just a couple of comments on our
participation that you would've seen.
We had reduced participation down to
38%. We've got 16 geographical wards
across the city, and the turnout varied from
53% in Banks Peninsula, a smaller community,
to 27% in Riccarton.
We sourced some information from the Electoral Commission to match with data
provided by our service provider on those that voted.
The results weren't surprising. Only one in four electors
from 18 to 24 voted. Over half the electors
from 65 to 79 voted. Demographics
covered,
25% of electors with Maori descent voted,
compared with 39% without. And many of the
wards with that lower turnout were also wards with higher
instances of socioeconomic deprivation.
And we had our Life in Christchurch survey, which is an annual
survey we do. It went out to 40,000 people, and we
had nearly 4,500 surveys
returned. And these are people that have engaged with council or
put themselves on this panel. But some of the key
statistics from that report on responses, which we're still
finalizing, is 90% of those people who
responded indicated they voted. Eighty-nine percent
of those respondents indicated they found it very easy or easy
to vote. And the biggest identified reason for not voting
was they didn't get round to it, they couldn't find enough information
about the candidates, or they couldn't find a candidate that appealed.
And the final comments I'll make, that they told us,
were what would make it easier to vote.
Over half the respondents indicated being able to vote online.
As you'd imagine, we had a lot of comments about postal being out of date,
unhelpful, not user-friendly.
We had 42% of those respondents wanted more information about
candidates and what they stand for, and 28% of
those candidates want... Of those respondents, sorry, want candidates
to be more active in the community during the election.
Mm-hmm.
So thank you for the opportunity to proceed.
Questions if there's time?
Yes. We've got one from Mr. Dan Roseborne.
Thanks, Joe. You mention here about voting documents seeing
34% being delivered by New Zealand Post.
Yes.
And I'm just wondering with, with New Zealand Post winding back a lot of the
services across Christchurch and Canterbury, how that might
affect,
well, the next election if we
continue with the status quo with our voting system?
Well, we used a mixture of New Zealand Post and DX.
I'm not aware of any significant issues with that delivery, but
obviously a reduction in services raises concerns about the
viability of post,
and just referring to the comments from the previous submitter,
regarding use of letterboxes these days and how many people actually do
get posted mail.
Can I, are you right there, Dan? Can I just ask, you obviously seem
to run a pretty good operation. What are your institutional
arrangements? Some councils use third parties.
Is yours basically in-house, the promotion, all that sort of stuff?
Is that what I understood from or implied from your comments before?
We've got an external electoral officer and an external
election service provider. But promotion
and sort of the general operations,
excluding the processing of votes and distribution of votes,
is done by council-
Okay
... or the special vote allocation.
All right. Thank you. I've got Celia Wade-Brown.
Thank you, Joe. I do have a question about how,
presumably you support the local government New Zealand Electoral Working
Group thing that wants Electoral Commission to take on
a bigger role. How do you see that
best work... If we were to go down that route at some stage,
how do we combine that national reach with a more
local focus on who the candidates
are, where the meetings are, that side of
getting people to really think local about who they're voting for?
Just acknowledging I'm presenting the council's submission, so I may have
some more detailed views. But in short, in our
submission, we've referenced
the need for consultation on how that's going to work and
potentially that overarching national messaging and things
like that with local promotion being led by the
councils. Whether or not I would see that should be a partnership with the
commission. But sort of aspects I think would
need council leadership.
Thank you.
Okay. Thank you very much for your contribution this morning and joining
us from Christchurch.
Okay. Thank you for the opportunity.
Right. Now we've got Councillor Richard Hills from Auckland Council by
Zoom. Hopefully, I think I've seen him
on there. Mr. Hills, are you there?
Good morning. We've got 10 minutes with you.
We've read your submission, so leave a little bit of time for questions,
please.
Tēnā koe, Chair. Thank you very much, and kia ora koutou katoa to the committee.
I'll read a lot of what I'm going to say just
to make sure I get it right. But yes, you've read our submission.
But largely, obviously, the 29% turnout for Auckland,
in my opinion, disaster for democracy.
But it is very concerning for us.
We do believe there are a range of factors
that have led to that decline of participation, but we do consider that
postal voting is part of that. I think it was around
38% of the people who said they didn't
vote, saying the reason was they filled it out, they didn't take it back, they
forgot to. And that's quite a big section of the community who just
didn't pop it back. So we think that postal voting and the
issues there. It also extended the timeframe this year because of the postal
service situation. We had to have an additional week or so
because of the time that letters go out and letters can come back in.
We consider that greater national leadership and coordination of the
administration of local elections is required.
In particular, the council reiterates its support for the Electoral Commission to
take responsibility for delivering local elections, given its experience
administering parliamentary elections and the operational capability and
independence required to manage the elections at scale.
Council would welcome strengthening the integrity framework surrounding elections.
Current processes rely heavily on the unsuccessful candidates initiating
court proceedings to challenge election results, and Council
recommends that you could introduce automatic recounts where margins are
small, such we had some margins that never got to a recount as low as
seven votes,
than that.
Hmm.
We acknowledge that voting method reform alone will not reverse declining
participation. A broad and nationally coordinated approach is required
to improve public understanding of local government, encourage participation in
local elections, include strengthening civic education, increasing
visibility of local elections to a level comparable to
parliamentary elections, and consider structural reforms to
enable greater alignment between local and
central functions.
We obviously recommend
the aim is to modernize the local electoral system, strengthen electoral
integrity, and support renewed public participation.
We do think we need to transition away from postal, even if the government
removed postal as an option. It just has become
fairly untenable when,
as a candidate delivering
pamphlets to many letterboxes, seeing just piles of them sitting in
the mud, wet,
and we have had issues up here, as you know, with the whole election being
quashed due to some concerns around the integrity of those
ballots and whether people were collecting ballots to
vote for others.
The
advance voting issues,
when we had 188, I think, boxes around the
whole city, we had good access to drop votes
off if people had them, and we did spend a lot of money on
advertising as a council. It's the private organization that does
the voting side of things. We recommend that
voters who are overseas during the election period are enabled to access and return
their voting documents like the parliamentary elections.
So parliamentary elections are really easy.
If you're overseas, you can basically take a picture of your vote and send it in.
That is not what is enabled
for local government. Special votes, we want that to be reviewed to
simplify the information required.
About,
I don't think it was half, about 40% of our special votes,
several thousand, were disallowed, and some of that was to do
with
occupation being incorrect or occupation not being written.
That is not a requirement in parliamentary special votes.
Mm-hmm.
Required in local government. So if someone was a student or someone changed their
job or someone just didn't want to fill out the either butcher or baker or
a candlestick maker, that was actually their vote was
disallowed. And when you had areas where there was a
change, someone not getting elected by seven or eight votes, that could
have been the difference.
We want to continue the provision of telephone dictation
voting,
more support for voters with disabilities.
We already talked about recounts
and safeguards. Sorry.
All right. We've got a few questions.
So-
We also... Oh, sorry, the last one was just we support extending local
government to four years if the government does, potentially having them at the
same time. The other one was investigating compulsory voting.
In Brisbane, I think they had a turnout for local elections of 85%.
They have compulsory voting, whereas in Western Australia they don't, and they're
down about the same as us, 30%. So just investigating that for
local government.
Right. First question is from Rima Nakde.
Hi, Richard. Kia ora.
In your introduction right now, you've been talking about,
we
did this, we found this. Who is we?
The Auckland Council, sorry.
Okay. So there's 19 other councilors.
Which other councilors were you in liaison with, with respect to this
report?
The submission has been approved by all councilors and
had local board input as well.
Uh-
This is not my personal submission, sorry.
But did you actually talk to them and see what can you add to
this report, to this submission?
Everyone. We had workshops, we had abilities to put information in, and then it was
debated at full council
Okay, awesome. Thank you. Can I ask another question?
Yeah.
Thank you. With respect to, you said the integrity of ballot
papers.
Yes.
What are you referring to, Councillor?
So there was lots of
anecdotal information of people seeing, including myself,
ballots strewn across neighborhoods, sitting wet in
areas. Maurice Williamson talked about them being in letterboxes of houses that
were removed for the eastern busway that didn't exist at all.
And then we have had a whole election quashed through a
process that the courts decided that there were
so many votes of people that were voted for,
but those people said they didn't vote.
So there were a lot of ballots that were-
Which one was that? Just to be absolutely clear.
Just to be absolutely- It's the Ōtara-Papatōetoe's-
Yeah
... election. So at the moment, the election's going on at the moment.
So-
Yeah
... there clearly is an issue there, but also everyone has a
story about seeing just tons of votes sitting,
and people going, "Oh"- Yeah, I know. We've got the point.
Right.
Yeah.
I've got a question from Camelia Bilic.
Thank you. Camilla Bilic.
Camilla, sorry.
Thank you. Thanks, Richard, for your submission.
I think the point that you raised around the
issue with special votes is something that the committee should note, and I hope
that we're able to address that in our report.
The question I had for you, though, is, you may or may not have had the
opportunity to see the report of local government New Zealand, which is obviously
separate from council now. I just wanted to know if you agreed with,
or Auckland Council agreed with their recommendations.
And specifically,
there seemed to be quite a bit of alignment between what you were suggesting with
the Electoral Commission. We also asked them about how that would be paid
for, and they indicated that it would be maybe a proposed
suggestion was
the central government and local government paying some of the costs with there
being a levying structure. Has Auckland Council body thought into
how the Electoral Commission change, if that was
implemented, might be funded?
Yeah, I guess there are already costs that would be shared anyway.
There's already Electoral Commission already
doing this work. So if we were able to tap into that, the same people, the same
trained people, to be able to spread that, and maybe that would be good training
for the central government election as well.
Not training, because both should be important.
But, at the moment, we do our own structures, pay our own way,
have a private organization do the voting.
If throughout the process that that was shared, it would probably be cheaper, I
imagine, over time for everyone. But also it's standardized for everyone.
They've got one port of call for both elections.
Thank you.
That's all? Right. Celia Wade-Brown.
Good morning, Richard. I had a question on the
special votes, not the disallowed ones, I think that's been covered well.
But that very big increase in the number of special votes.
And I wondered two things about it.
First of all, do you think that the new
ability for enrollment details to be
automatically updated, like if somebody changes their address through
Waka Kotahi, would help?
Secondly,
do you know if people tried to enroll or update their
enrollment details on the morning?
Because local government,
you have to have enrolled by the day before.
Do you have any information on that?
There were people saying that they couldn't enroll on the day,
but you could enroll right up to the day, which is helpful, but it's just
disappointing that a significant number were disallowed due to things like
information being wrong. Having automatic updates would be amazing.
A lot of people, as shown by the census, shown by the voting, and shown by the
special votes, move around within a three-year period.
Lots of people, especially in Auckland-
Yes
...
renters, et cetera, a lot of moving around.
The floods displaced hundreds and hundreds of families.
And so the more we can make it easier for people, because they're not thinking
about it every day, "Oh, I need to update my enrollment,"
until they get there and go, "Why can't I vote?" Or, "Why didn't I get my voting
papers?" Or, "Why did someone vote for me when I didn't vote?"
Thank you.
Right. Thank you, Mr. Hills, for a comprehensive
submission this morning and coming from Auckland.
Right. Thank you very much.
We've got Kay Jones, who's joining us,
becoming a regular, which is nice. Right. We've got five minutes with you.
Kia ora, can I say lovely to see you all, and there's some new faces I haven't met
before.
I would just endorse many of the comments made by local government in New Zealand.
Richard Hills, I've been watching online, the previous ones.
And I'd also, even more strongly than in my
written submission, support the move away from postal voting and to
bring back a consistent in-person vote
like we have for central
parliamentary elections.
I don't want to talk too long because you may have
questions, but an example would be of
community education. So a friend who's a Muslim
woman in an area not Wellington,
organized with her community education about
what voting rights are here, because this is something
that some of the members of the group did not have in their countries of origin.
They are now New Zealand permanent residents and citizens, but voting is
new. So educating them about parliamentary
elections and that system was a challenge, but they got through it.
They understood it. When it came to then saying, "Oh, by the
way, we also have local government elections, which use a
different process"-
No
... it was a really difficult education
issue. And unless they actually, by that stage, knew a
candidate who was standing,
they were not engagedWith the process of
posting. For some of them, they didn't have
security of housing, so the mail was difficult.
There were a lot of things. So that's just one group.
But I'm also a community moderator and in the online
group of over 2,000 people that I moderate, every
week there is somebody concerned about a parcel missing or a
parcel that's been misdelivered to them.
And that's parcels, so we know about them, but people don't know what mail
they don't get except when there are reports of, "Oh, if you're in that block of
flats, all your ballot papers have been strewn down the street."
And yes, we had those reports. And yes, we can tell people they
can get a special vote if they know in advance, but for many of them,
the details they get does not make it easy, and so they
just don't vote. So there's a whole bunch of people
who don't get their right to vote because of
procedural issues, as opposed to the much easier
process, which is still not perfect, but easier for
being able to go to a voting booth and cast your ballot.
So I'll leave it to questions.
Thank you very much. Right. Questions, members?
Okay. No.
Good.
One.
Since there's no question,
I mean, no one else. Oh, thank you very much.
I think the burning question, we've heard so much about
postal votes and things like that contributing to low
voter turnout.
Low turn.
But it's very low. It's very low in Auckland.
And we just heard
one of the councilors
go on about so many other things, but I look at people like him, I'm like,
"Why is it so low in Auckland?"
And since we've got a bit of time.
Well, I've lived in Auckland. And while, because as you've
gathered, I'm a chatty person who goes and talks with neighbors and sort of other
people and gets engaged in communities, but that's not the case for everyone.
There are many communities within Auckland who tend
to operate within themselves, and unless they have
a point of engagement of somebody coming to them or being part of their community,
they don't see the relevance to them.
There isn't sort of a big
publicity campaign to raise the awareness of what local
government does and how it connects to them and why their votes
make a difference. We get far more information now, definitely echo
those calls for having the Electoral
Commission taking a stronger role so that there can be
more work together with community groups about raising the
awareness of what the importance of their vote means
and why they should have an opportunity and, of course, making sure it's
simplified and modern. So like a special voting paper that had lists
occupation for somebody who's like, "Am I a contractor?
Am I whatever?" All the barriers need-
Right
... to be removed to make it as simple as possible,
and it needs to be done in advance, not just in the last two weeks before an
election, because it takes people a while to get their head around
ideas. And even things like, yes, Auckland Council, Wellington
Council, many councils have their meetings online, but people don't
necessarily go to them and know about them.
And you're going to be hearing after me from Sam Summers and
people on the It's in the Ballot, and they do a great job of trying to make it
lively and engaging for what the voting is.
But they're not able to do that thing beforehand to say, "Oh, this
is really important." You get really good turnouts at local government
events if there is a particular issue of
importance-
Mm
... whether it's a polluted river or whether it's dog attacks in an area.
But that's-
Right
... a single incident type of thing, and people don't always remember that when it
comes round to the how can they actually make sure that
people who've got good ideas get on the council and can
engage with them.
Okay.
You know.
All right. Hey, thank you, Kay, for coming again, for your
submission.
Thank you.
I'm going to ask Sam and Nick. I see you at the back.
I hope-- Are you okay coming up?
Yeah.
I know we're ahead of time.
We're ahead of time. We've got a bit of time. Sorry.
Members, the next one scheduled is not available.
Sorry.
So thanks for being amenable.
That's all right. And this is relevant.
We're also live streaming this select committee meeting for our followers to
also be able to watch.
Very good.
Because a lot of people don't know about our... You can watch these online.
Okay. So-
Yeah
... we've got five minutes with you.
10.
No, 10.
10. Yes.
Extraordinary.
We tried to get more, but the committee said no.
No, but that's enough.
Okay.
Yeah. So It's in the Ballot covered the 2025 local body elections.
I actually think we may have covered the better turnout councils
on numbers because many of the councils we didn't cover broke the 50% mark.
Mm-hmm.
As you would see in the submission, we covered most of the greater Wellington
Regional Councils, the lower half of the Horizons,
a good chunk of Bay of Plenty, and also,
a limited part of Waikato. The plan was to do more.
Money talks, and when there's a lack of it,
it does make it very difficult to actually make it function.
One thing I've noticed is when it comes to local councils is no one wants to fund
coverage of the elections as a rule.
We did have some support from Manawatū District Council, Horowhenua District
Council, Kāpiti Coast District Council, and Carterton District Council through
venue hire charges not billed. In the case of
Bay of Plenty Regional Council, they approached us for $500
grants per Meet the Candidates event that involves their candidates.
And councils
who charged us were Tauranga District Council, Palmerston North City Council,
South Wairarapa District Council,
Wellington City Council, Hutt City Council, Whakatane District Council,
and Western Bay of Plenty District Council.
And we also did try to apply for funding through grants through some councils with
a lot of ghosting rejections going from
there.
We-And candidate participation rate can be a bit all
over the place. Some areas, it's like you're the best thing that's come into town,
like "Sell Won Too Good" with the TV show back in the day.
And then others of them sit there and run away like the plague.
And I'd like to say sorry to Celia's former council, Wellington City Council, but
so many of them like to run away like the plague.
But that's the choice there. I did mainly the production parts
of doing that and the presenting the shows.
However, Nick is the one who dealt with all the candidates.
So, if-
Um-
Would you like to take over?
Yeah.
Hi, good morning, everyone.
So one of my main roles was candidate liaison,
and
I was very lucky to do that.
Now, in general,
it was really, really good communication between
the
candidates and It's in the Ballot.
And
there were a lot of times where
things could've been made a lot easier
with
help from the council.
Sam will-
Whakatane District Council was one that
some candidates would not tick the box to release their details.
So we would try through the electoral officer.
Whakatane District Council was not doing it with a 10-foot bargepost.
Other councils, like Cape Coast District Council, just forwarded it on.
Yeah. So sometimes it's an uphill-
Yeah
... battle. And this is something that
we do out of civic duty to just...
We believe it should be done, and
we would like it to be easier.
Um-
And what would that involve?
Well, it would... Communication.
Funding.
So requiring the council.
You're really essentially at the hands of the council, though, aren't you?
Yeah. Oh, for this one, yes. For local bodies, we are.
Yeah.
Okay. Right. Hey, have you finished, Nick? Sorry.
I have, yes.
Right. Let's have some questions. Members?
No doubt. I've got one.
Laura? Yeah.
Thank you.
I was speaking to Todd, but...
I know. And to be honest, I'm subbing and I'm not completely all over the
full conversation. I'm really curious for how long you guys have been around or
how long you've been doing this for.
Started at the 2020 general election.
That went for a very interesting process.
In 2022 was when we upgraded, and I spent three and a half
grand on a broadcaster computer that basically put onto
TV-quality broadcasting to put on Facebook, YouTube, and Twitch, and
we've expanded to TikTok since then.
Mm-hmm.
And
so 2022 local bodies, the Hamilton West by-election,
and then proceeded on to the lower part of North Island for the
2023 general election, the Porirua-Kennedys by-election, and we
covered a couple of by-elections, the Tauranga City Council special local bodies-
Mm-hmm
... and the last local body elections.
Okay. And you're not in South Island.
I would love to be there, but-
We were not good in-
I mean, James Makers also have expressed interest as well for getting there.
Yeah.
We would love to this year.
Mm-hmm.
I would love to go to places like Westport and-
Mm
... places in the middle of nowhere.
But yeah, it's not an easy feat when we've got a nice, lovely body of
water
Yeah.
In the way. But that is... I'd love to make it happen.
Nice ticky to it. Right. Camilla Billick.
Thank you very much. I just wanted to make more of a comment.
Mm.
Just thank you for your interest in covering our democracy.
And I'm sure that you probably watch more of our speeches than some of us around
the table. And-
Can you hold it?
I'll put it this way. I can probably name off the names as good as the speaker can,
but I don't think many people can.
I think he could probably take some lessons from you in that regard.
Oh.
Thank you.
Shot fired.
All right. Okay, on that note, I think we might bring this to a
close.
Yeah.
Hey, thank you for your contribution.
Nathan's made us all laugh.
Yeah.
That's it.
Thank you for your contribution. Nice to see you again.
Thank you.
Right. Now we're going to go back to Charlotte.
Melcer, is that right? Is on the line, isn't she?
Your name tag's-
Hello? Are you there?
In the book.
Oh,
good point.
Yeah.
It's okay. I think Todd-
Right
... coming back any minute.
Ms. Melcer, are you available? She's-
Sure. Hello.
Oh, good morning.
Hi.
Nice to see you. Sorry we jumped ahead.
No, that's okay.
Yeah.
Lovely to be here. Thank you so much for, um, the time.
That's all right. We've got five minutes.
We like to ask questions, but,
we read your submission, but maybe highlight just the key points.
Yeah. Well, I'm actually going to go through a little bit more, so hope there
might be time for questions. There might not be.
So, Tina Koto Katua. I'm Charlotte.
I'm a district counselor in Whanganui.
So I am going to be speaking from my direct experience of the
2025 elections in our district, and also in
support of my council's formal submission.
So central to my point today is our local election
system is no longer aligned with the realities of how people
live, move, and engage with democracy.
The 2025 elections exposed major weaknesses in both
how voting papers reach people and how democratic information
reaches them. The first is the growing
fragility of the postal voting. For many years,
postal voting has been practical and trusted, but the conditions
that made it effective are changing.
People are moving more frequently between rentals, temporary housing,
family homes, and care settings, and housing instability and
transience are now a normal reality for many New Zealanders.
At the same time, the postal system itself is becoming less central to everyday
life. Many people, particularly younger voters,
simply do not interact with their letterboxes in the same way previous
generations did.During the campaign period, I
personally walked past many letterboxes containing damaged and
uncollected voting papers. That image has stayed with me
because it symbolizes a voting system that is becoming
increasingly disconnected from the realities of modern life.
And
the impact of this was visible in the growing reliance on special votes.
In Wanganui, around 18% of special votes were disallowed.
Approximately 500 people who believed they had successfully
voted, but whose votes were never counted.
And I want to be very clear that 500 people thinking they
participated in local democracy only to have their vote excluded
is not a low number. It's a warning sign.
When some districts across the country reported disallowance rates about as high as
60%, this points clearly to a structural national issue,
not an isolated local error. The second issue I want to
emphasize is the omission of Maori Ward candidate information that was
seen in multiple districts, including my own.
Mm.
The issue is not simply the absence of profiles for individual
candidates. The deeper harm is that many candidate
statements do more than just describe the person standing.
They help voters understand the broader purpose and democratic
value of dedicated Maori representation.
So when those profiles were omitted, voters received less
civic information about the value of Maori representation
itself.
That is particularly serious where voters were simultaneously
being asked to vote in referenda on whether Maori wards should continue.
So in effect, some voters were asked to decide the future of Maori
representation while being given less information about that
representation than they received for general ward positions.
That creates an inequitable information environment, and it risks
shaping referendum outcomes themselves.
In Wanganui, the omission also exposed an accountability gap,
because the election was being delivered through a private contractual
agreement.
There was no sufficiently clear obligation on the provider to
own and rapidly correct the error.
Mm.
For something as fundamental as democratic participation,
accountability should never depend on the fine print of a
contract.
For me, these issues point to the same conclusion: incremental delivery
fixes are no longer enough. Orange bins, DX Mail, and other
mitigations may improve convenience,
but they do not address the deeper structural weaknesses now
visible in local election delivery.
We need nationally consistent standards for voter communication, special votes,
candidate information, and election administration.
So I support transferring operational responsibility for local elections
to the Electoral Commission while preserving a strong local role
for councils in voter education, community outreach, and democratic
leadership.
The systems should be nationally robust.
The relationships must remain local.
So in closing, local democracy depends on public trust.
If people cannot reliably receive their voting papers, if
hundreds of special votes are discarded, and if voters do not
receive equitable information about the purpose of
representation itself, then confidence in the
legitimacy of the result is weakened.
This no longer is a matter of process refinement.
It is now a question of democratic resilience. Thank you.
Right. Thanks, Councilor. I've got a question from Mr. Carl Bates.
Ka pai.
Thanks, Councilor. Charlotte, good to see you this morning
and appreciate the breadth of your submission and the
issues you've raised. Just a detailed question on the
mail issue.
Sure.
And you highlighted the DX Mail.
Yeah.
Do you think there's any particular challenge with DX Mail versus New
Zealand Post and the success of that?
And I appreciate that's an incremental change issue, but just interested in any
feedback on that because we've received, in the constituency office,
feedback on DX Mail and other areas of public
service engagement.
In terms of DX Mail being superior?
Being-
Or not as superior. Yeah. Not as successful as New Zealand
Post in delivery.
Yeah. I don't have any comments on that, sorry.
Minister?
All right.
I think we're at time. Hey, thank you for your
submission, Councilor, doing that under your personal garus, but
very comprehensive submission and thank you for that.
Great. Hey, thanks and all the best. Ka kite.
Ka pai.
Right. Now, we're going to go to J-
Election service.
Oh, right. We just...
Good morning.
Gail, are you there with us?
Good mo- Are you there? Good morning. Oh, there you are.
Nice to see you both.
Good morning.
Hey, now we've got 10 minutes with you.
Well ahead of schedule, but so thank you for coming on a bit earlier.
But looking forward to hearing what you have to say.
Sure. Well,
can you hear me okay?
Yes, we can.
Okay. So we'll take our submission as read, rather than going through
line by line.
Sure. Yeah.
And perhaps we can just go straight to our summary because
obviously we'd like more time for you guys to ask us questions.
So, our summary is on our submission is on page seven.
And the first conclusion or recommendation really is
the legislative re-review. We would really encourage, if we
can, a comprehensive review of our legislation.
Local Electoral Act is 25 years old now.
It was written even before the internet,
so it does need, we believe, a full review and a
full rewrite, particularly if, and it's a
big if, we are able to move into some form of electronic voting
or something like that, then the whole act, I believe, needs a
full reviewThe second point,
special vote reform.
One of the points that you have asked us to comment on is the
number of disallowed special votes compared to allowed special votes.
We believe that whole process needs a review, a rewrite.
Special votes play a critical role.
We are under quite strict current legislative
requirements.
I follow those strict legislative requirements because I must
as an electoral officer,
and that does mean invalidating a number of special votes,
which is really difficult because I'm invalidating them on a
technicality.
Mm.
And someone's gone to a lot of trouble to exercise a special vote,
and I as the electoral officer come along and disallow it because
they haven't signed it, they haven't dated it, they haven't done it right.
Can you just say what those
technicalities are? We've heard about occupation, but-
Yes
... what specifically?
Well, a declaration
must accompany a special vote, so it must be
signed and dated and witnessed.
Mm.
And the
occupation, of course. One of the biggest issues we had this time around
was occupation. We know that the Electoral Commission have now
removed occupation from their declarations.
We would like to follow suit and have that removed because it just makes sense.
Their rationale is that not everyone has an occupation.
What do you do there? So,
we just want to have parity with the Electoral Commission and have some of
that complexity removed, and
a review of that special vote process, so we remove some of the
barriers.
Okay, cool.
So that's the... Sorry, I'll just turn the page.
Sorry to interrupt you, but-
It's all right. No problem. I think postal voting,
you will be aware of the limitations of New Zealand
Post. We also are aware of the two
mail service providers, which you heard earlier on,
New Zealand Post and DX Mail. This was the first time that we pretty much split
the country in two. So New Zealand Post did about half and
DX Mail did about half. And in my view, it
worked very well.
We had the longer voting period. We had two mail providers,
and they split the country. And as I said, in my view, I think
it worked very well.
It was also complemented by a significant increase in vote
boxes in the community, where people could then hand-deliver it in their
places where they go, supermarkets and that sort of stuff, libraries, where
they actually
visit.
You are aware that Auckland Council is
considering going to booth voting. We are doing a lot of work on that.
I'm the electoral officer for Auckland Council, doing a lot of work on that.
We are talking
with them.
I don't think it's a silver bullet.
There are a number of things that concern me a little bit with moving back to booth
voting. The cost increase is going to be significant.
I don't think the voter turnout is going to increase at all.
I think, in fact, it may decrease, and I think the
resources needed for booth voting is quite significant.
And because of that, there's probably a bit of risk in there for
local government. But it is permitted under the legislation, and it is
a political decision.
Systems and quality assurance,
that's with the issue we had with the Poriki District Council,
and I put my hand up totally for that one.
I'm the final checker of everything that goes out of my
office. And I check absolutely everything, and I missed it.
So it was as simple as that. We had it on the voting document.
It was not in the candidate profile statement.
I didn't see that. The checking process before me didn't see
that.
However, we've learnt from that, and our software is being
amended now so that there is an automatic cross-check.
If it's on the voting document, it's in the booklet.
So that's being addressed now.
Civic education,
that really, really is important.
I think we've been pushing for civics now probably for 20 years.
I've been running elections for 40 years.
We're pushing civics as a national comprehensive
program for a number of years, and I think it's really important just to
educate electors what does local government do, why is it so important
to exercise their vote, et cetera.
In complaint management, there is processes in our legislation now that
people can complain and do. To me, there are processes
in place where they can go directly to the police if there's an alleged
offense. We can submit things to the police directly.
So I think that's covered now. I think
that really covers
our six conclusions and key recommendations.
So,
I'm more than happy to take any questions.
Right. We've got a number of questions. First one, Mr. Carl Bates.
Thanks very much, Chair, and thanks for the work that you do.
I'm interested in the special vote point and understand the occupation point that
you made. We've had quite a bit of feedback around the challenges with
special votes through the election.
Yeah.
Do you have any insight into the percentage
of the votes that were done with
council offices or with the council
support programs across the country versus special votes done by other
people,
in terms of what was accepted and what wasn't?
Yeah. We probably do things slightly different than our
competitors. We ourselves process all special votes.
The councils themselves do not. So all special votes come to
me, to my office, and my staff process those.
We do not put them out to the council staff to do.
So, I suppose, sorry, what I'm meaning is, in my case, for example, I
did my special vote in the council office with a council staff member.
Yes.
Do you have any insight into all of the votes, say, for
example, completed by those council officers that came through to you,
the percentage of those that actually were valid versus that
weren't, compared to special votes that were done through
other means? Does that make sense?
Yes.
No matter who fills or where they are received or who
receives them, they all still come back to our staff, so we have a
consistent approach-
Yeah
... of marking those, or of checking those.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yeah, I think the question is more aligned to
the percentage of special votes that were filled in at a council office
provided in front of a council person, staff member.
How many of those-
Okay
... percentage of those that may have been disallowed versus allowed.
Correct.
No, I don't have that. We do issue
a lot of special votes through the post.
So we have an 0800 number, so someone can ring up, and we will send it out.
So we have no control over that. So we'll send them out, there is
instructions on it, but we're not sort of standing over them saying, "Don't
forget to fill that out." If someone is coming into the office, a council
office or library, we have that ability, but not those with remote
where it's through the post.
Okay.
The other thing the report-
I've got a question
... just sort of add to that if I may, is that someone may
request a special vote through a council office, but then they might just walk up,
take it home,
fill it out at home, and then put it back into the postal system.
We know it's been issued by a council office, but we don't know the
circumstances as how that was filled in and
obviously
Okay. Makes sense. Thank you.
Right. I understand. Right. Camilla Billich.
Thank you. I just had a question around the special
votes and the fact that occupation means that a
blank occupation box means you can't count them.
Where exactly is that specified?
Regulation,
oh, I was going to bring it's in the-
It's in the regulations.
So I was-
Regulations. Yeah.
Okay. Thank you.
Right. I've got a question from Dan Rosenwald.
Yeah. Thank you. There was an interesting point you had in your summary here
around factors that contribute to a trend in voter decline,
and it was non-resident ratepayer roll
complexities. And I was just wondering how that was leading
to a decline in voter turnout.
Our number of non-resident ratepayer electors each
triennial election is steadily declining.
There is quite a complex
enrollment process that a person must do.
So you live outside the district, you pay rates within the district, you
are eligible to vote, but there is quite a complex process
to go through,
a stringent enrollment form, which is
regulations.
And that's a bit of a barrier, we think, for that process.
Do you think it's worth scrapping that at all or?
A personal view or an official view?
Well, personal if you don't-
A personal view is they are extremely expensive, and we get very few
on that roll.
Okay. Interesting.
Okay. Is that official or is that personal?
That's
personal. I better be careful. That's personal.
Oh, that's very helpful. You've only been doing it for 40 years or four decades,
whatever. Right. Now, last question from Celia Wade-Brown.
Thank you, Chair. And thank you for bringing up something that
other people haven't, which is when a candidate is
unopposed. And I know that during the campaign,
this was explained to me that if the candidate is unopposed, then they
don't necessarily have to go in the candidate booklet.
You've said that you've got some software now that
says if they are on the voting document, then you
better have something in the candidate booklet.
Does that now mean that practically you will
have some... I mean, supposing the mayor runs unopposed, you'll have something
about the mayor. Because my view is if you're looking at the makeup of a
council as a whole, you want to know who's there
unopposed as well as the ones where there's a contest.
No, that's not what that meant. That meant that we cannot have a repeat
of the Opotiki situation where we had them on the voting, had candidates on the
voting document, but missing from the booklet. That is now to be addressed.
What you're referring to is, um-
Sorry, I can't hear.
Hey, go.
Sorry, just say that again, darl.
I think what you're referring to, well, what I was referring to
is the Opotiki situation where we had them on the
voting document, but they did not appear in the booklet.
No, no, I'm not talking about that.
I'm talking about the example where you had, people were
running unopposed.
Yes.
And therefore you complied with the legal requirements
and did not put them in the candidate booklet.
Yes.
Is there anything that stops you being able to put them in the
candidate booklet?
I think
we raised the issue of potential confusion of electors, that
they're saying, "Why can't I vote for this person?" Because they're not in the
booklet. So that's one thing. The second thing is, if it was to be
adopted, it would have to be a national thing.
We'd have to everyone in the country should do the same.
So then your statement that your software checks
against who's in the list. So you're saying if it's unopposed,
you can't do a vote of no confidence or anything like that, can you?
They're just there.
No. No, you can't.
Yeah. Okay. That answers that. Thank you.
Hey, so just to go back to the occupation, the troublesome
requirement for that
Is that a legislative change? I just want to be clear, what is the
nature? That wouldn't require a legislative change?
No, regulatory change, not a legislative change.
Oh.
So-
That's an important distinction.
Mm-hmm.
Okay. That's very helpful, you've helped us.
Hey, now thank you for your contribution this morning.
Thank you for what you've done, and do.
Yeah, it's been great to have you on this morning.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Okay.
Okay.
Thank you.
Now, last submitter this morning, Jette
de Jong, who is on here. Good morning. How are you?
Kia ora. How are you?
Very good. We've got five minutes with you.
Yeah.
Lovely background.
So, my name is Jette de Jong.
I live in Waipu in Northland. I grew up in a little place called
Opua Rahi in Hauraki, and
I'm a
tangata tiriti of Dutch descent.
So,
I was very concerned about the local elections for a
number of reasons.
One is that my son, who's male, has always come to our
place, was dropped off the electoral roll even
though he's never changed his address.
So I'm just concerned about...
He's back on it now.
He's 23 years old.
I'm just concerned about what's going to happen
next election, where now the law has changed
and
people
can't do same-day enrollments or enroll within two weeks of an
election.
What's going to happen if they've had paperwork to say they're on the
electoral roll and then they turn up and they're told they're not?
So, I guess that's a concern that I'm looking to
have answered in this process.
My other big concern is, although I live in the
Whangarei electorate,
the electorate next door to me is Kaipara, and I'm aware that
there was only 21 votes between the top
two mayoral candidates.
But 288 special votes were disallowed.
And just listening to the previous conversation
perhaps has helped to explain some things.
But I just
don't really understand how a vote can be accepted as a special
vote and then later disallowed
because that person was not on the electoral roll or their details
weren't up to date. Because I just think to myself, well,
if their details weren't up to date or they were not on the roll, why were they
allowed to make the special vote?
And
yeah. And then when the second
candidate, Snow Tani, applied for a recount,
the judge disallowed it because they said, "Oh, well, it would be more
appropriate to run an inquiry into the wider conduct of the election."
But that also wasn't done. So it just feels very much to
me like,
because I'm aware that there are a large number of voters,
particularly Maori, that fell off the roll,
and so they were often the ones doing the special votes.
So first Maori were dropped off the roll.
Then when they made a special vote, over 60%
of them weren't counted. And then when the
results were questioned,
a judge didn't allow a review because the wrong question was asked.
It just feels very much like a deliberate campaign
to prevent a Maori candidate from winning in that electorate,
which is known for its previous very
racist, anti-Maori mayor.
And yeah, so they're just questions I feel
that I would like this inquiry to answer.
And I just feel that I don't feel satisfied with the
results of the election, particularly in the Kaipara area,
because I don't feel like they were fair.
And
lastly, I do support the
use of community voting boxes, and I used one myself.
But I would like to see more of them in smaller towns like Waipu,
because I had to drive 45 minutes each way to get to the nearest one.
And that's all I've got to say, really, and happy to answer
questions or get answers to some of mine.
Okay.
Thank you for that contribution. Obviously, the postal box
is very interesting.
I've just got to say to you, it's not the purpose of the select committee to look
into specific issues like that. We're dealing with the principles of
better local government election
voting process. But thank you for bringing those to our
attention anyway. All right? Right. Thank you.
That brings us to a close, everyone.
We're now going to go into private session.
Sam and Nick, I'm going to have to ask you to vacate the
room because we've got a-